Article: Applicative command line parser (#64)
RustMagazine/rustmagazine: content/issue-2/applicative-parsing.md

discovered multiple ways to manage this complexity. Programming went from physically wiring
the instructions to writing them as mnemonic instructions, to abstractions with variables,
labels, functions, and so on.

[Functional Programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_programming?useskin=vector)
is one of the paradigms for managing complexity with its main idea of writing code as a set of
functions and using those functions to pass values around instead imperative style of steps
to perform to mutate some data.

Rust supports both functional and imperative approaches well and parts of its standard library
are implemented with functional use in mind. Following examples show the difference between two
approaches:

Imperative approach describes exact steps program needs to take to calculate a sum of vector
items:
- initialize `sum` with 0
- start at the first element of the array
- multiply `i`th element of the array by two and add it to `sum`
- proceed to the next element
- repeat until the last element of the array

```rust
let xs = vec![1,2,3,4];
let mut sum = 0;
let mut i = 0;
loop {

>     sum += xs[i] * 2;

Author: The idea was to make it a function that might not be in a standard library. I guess calculating sum of only even numbers works better here, will update the example and descriptions.

    i += 1;
    if i == xs.len() {
        break;
    }

> }

Author: Well, yea, it's somewhat exaggerated to show explicit mutations and passing state around, etc. Using `for` and iterators makes it more like a traditional Rust, but that's mostly because of the language support for this particular task. I can go with manual toml/json parsing so language itself doesn't help much, but it's going to be a much bigger example. I guess I'll update the explanations here.

> }

Reviewer: how about using argument parsing as an example with a `getopts` like style for imperative and a teaser to the end of the tutorial for the functional approach

something like

```
fn parse() -> Args {
	let name = None;
	let answer = None;
	
	let args = std::env::args();
	while let (Some(arg), Some(value)) = (args.next(), args.next()){
		if arg == "--name" {
			name = Some(value.to_string());
		}
		if arg == "--answer" {
			answer = Some(value.parse::<i32>.unwrap()),
		}
	};

	Args {
		name: name.expect("'--name' not given"),
		answer: answer.expect("'--answer' not given"),
	}
}
```

also relates to your advantage that the functional approach plits business and boilerplate logic...

> }

Author: This example is very good at showing horrors of imperative command line parsing but I think it's hard to make a fair and easy to understand functional counterpart. For that options are:
- dump all the required code from this article to make something that works - it will be a lot of code and I'm not sure if people are going to be interested in reading though without explanations and understanding how this works.
- show only compositions from this article or bpaf - while more readable - it's not quite apples to apples comparison. 

Calculating sum on the other hand is simple enough and people can relate to both versions. I could be mistaken though.

> }

Reviewer: I think the readerbase should have a vague idea of what functional programming is..
but it makes sense to say

> Imagine you want to create an arguemnt parser that parses your arguments into a struct like this:
> ```rust
> struct Args {
> 	name: String,
>   answer: i32,
> }
> ```
>
> If you want to write an argument parser purely imperatively, look at the horrors that entails, think about how to scale and maintain this:
> ```
> ... 
> ```
>
> What if you could use functional programming to just describe what you want:
>
> ```rust
> let name = Arg("--name").parse(|n| n.to_string())
> let answer = Arg("--answer").parse(|a| a.parse::<i32>)
> let Args = name
>	.zip(answer)
>	.map(|name, answer| Args { name, answer })
>	.run()
>	.unwrap()
> ```

```

> While functional approach describes what the result is:

Author: Right, it is mentioned now, thank you.

- start from a sequence containing all the items in the array
- make a new sequence from it by doubling all the items
- result is a sum of all the elements of this new sequence

```rust
let xs = vec![1,2,3,4];
let sum = xs.iter().map(|x| x * 2).sum();
```

Both examples compile to the same set of instructions but it is easier to make a mistake in the

> imperative one.

Author: True, but that's mostly by the power of magic in `for` and `IntoIterator`. You can do this with iteration but not with other subjects... I guess that's one more point towards using example with parsing options where using iterators doesn't help much.

Not all the tasks are perfect fit for functional approach, at least not in an obvious way. This
article is going to explore ways of using purely functional approach for a problem that seems

> to be better suited for imperative style.

Author: The way I see it functional approach means lack of mutability in external API and high level composition as one of the main tools. With parsing libraries I worked with you usually get either something declarative that can't do much outside of the explicitly supported cases (most of the cli parsers I looked at), something very imperative (some cli parsers) or something that exposes internal details too much and makes you to thread the state around and be very careful about what's validated and what isn't - mostly nom.

> to be better suited for imperative style.

Reviewer: ^ That would be a way better introduction to motivate an generic applicative parser ;)

> to be better suited for imperative style.

Author: You can totally use the approach described here to make applicative and monadic parsers in other areas. I have one more to parse TUI style input. Not published properly but [visible](https://github.com/pacak/omnomnomicon) on github in his nom-style state and monadic style is being worked on.

Making it fully generic is harder because HKTs are not thing in Rust :(

> to be better suited for imperative style.

Reviewer: Sure but that's a "What else" section then.. kind of

1. why bother writing an applicative parser for CLI
2. how to
3. look works great and can parse basically anything, so what else can we apply this concept to...?

There are not a whole much of this lets say haskell inspired functional approaches to things in rust so far. The ecosystems are related but haskell is just way more flexible with its more powerful type system.
It does come with some nice approaches to things stemming from more theoretical backgrounds and this article is great to show how to make use of those in rust.
An extended version could go into the limitations of rust HKT and such but i feel that has been talked about in length elsewhere.

    fn run(self) -> String {
        self.0.into()
    }
}

#[test]
fn sample() {
    // --name Bob
    let name = Magic("Bob");
    let _result = name.run(); // "Bob"
}
```

At this point parser can consume multiple string arguments using `Magic` and `Magic::run`.

## Adding more types

Next step would be to allow to have arguments of different types. Consider filenames. While
most of the functions would take a regular string reference as a filename - not every `String` is
a valid filename and not every filename is a valid `String`. It's a good practice to keep
`String` for strings and `PathBuf` for filenames. Type can also serve as a documentation for
users.

To be able to consume `PathBuf` from the user parser needs a way to represent it in the first
place. One approach would be to make `Magic` a generic datatype:

```rust
struct Magic<T>(T);
impl<T> Magic<T> {
    fn run(self) -> T {
        self.0
    }
}
```

This allows to represent values and get them out but since handwavy magic creates variables of
type `Magic<&'static str>` parser still needs a way to change the type to `Magic<PathBuf>` or
something else.

For that Category Theory gives an abstraction called

> [`Functor`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functor_(functional_programming)?useskin=vector).

Author: Probably github being usual self, works for me when rendered with `zine`

Functor allows to change a value inside of a generic context to some other value with the same
or a different type but without changing the context. Sounds scary, but `Option::map` does more
or less the same thing:

```rust
impl<T> Magic<T> {
    fn map<R, F: Fn(T) -> R>(self, f: F) -> Magic<R> {
        Magic(f(self.0))
    }
}

#[test]
fn sample() {
    use std::path::PathBuf;
    // --name Cargo.toml
    let name = Magic("Cargo.toml"); // Magic<&str>
    let _result = name.map(PathBuf::from).run(); // "Cargo.toml", PathBuf
}
```

Every valid `Functor` implementation must satisfy a two laws - preserving identity morphism and
preserving composition of morphisms. For as long as it only changes the values in a context

> without affecting the context itself - implementation should be valid.

Author: Well, at least I managed to avoid most of the ELISaundersMacLane parts. Let me see if I can rephrase it...

each.

At this point parser can deal with any number of arguments of any types allowing to pick valid
combinations.

## Failing intentionally and succeeding unconditionally

While an app might require for user to specify some arguments, for some other arguments there
might be a valid default value. Alternatively for some cases parser might benefit from better
error messages than default "argument --foo is missing". Previously defined `alt` with helps
with both cases when composed with either always failing or always succeeding parser:

```rust
impl<T> Magic<T> {
    /// put a value into a minimal valid context
    fn pure(val: T) -> Self {
        Magic(Ok(val))
    }

    /// produce a failing computation with custom error message
    fn fail(msg: &str) -> Self {
        Magic(Err(msg.to_owned()))
    }
}
```

Customizing error messages:

```rust
let name = short.alt(long).alt(fail("You need to pass --long or --short"));
```

Fallback to some default value:

```rust
let name = short.alt(pure("Anonymous"));
```

## Defined operations summary

Operations defined so far are sufficient to express arbitrary computations on command line

> arguments:

Author: First part of the article tries to define all the operations and `Magic` is a simple placeholder for "I don't care about exact representation part for as long as I can define what basic operations are". I'm talking about it here, maybe it should be more explicit.

> Tutorial starts with some magical handwavey way of taking things from `std::env::args()` and placing
> them into variables and introduces a simple way of taking them out of the variables.

> // a magical container with a value already inside

This gives two benefits:
- while magical and not fully functional code is simple enough to understand even from the snippets in the article
- it serves as a guide to how you might approach to your own problems with category theory. Small bits at a time, iterative improvements. Doing the whole mutable `BTreeMap` with all the ugly inner bits at the same time as trying to understand what you want to do is kind of hard.

    fn pure(val: T) -> Self {
        Magic(Ok(val))
    }

    /// create an unconditionally failing computation
    fn fail(msg: &str) -> Self {
        Magic(Err(msg.to_owned()))
    }
}
```

Those seven operations serve as a base for the parser. They allow to compose primitive argument
parsers in many ways to create a very wide range of computations and there's no mutations in the
API itself so it fits perfectly with a functional programming style.

There's a few examples of useful operations implemented in terms of this base API

Optional command line arguments:

```rust
fn optional(magic: Magic<T>) -> Magic<Option<T>> {
    // if magic contains a value - wrap it in Some, otherwise use None
    // this will also consume any errors that can be inside, but we'll address
    // this problem later
    magic.map(Some).alt(pure(None))
}
```

Validating values with a function:

```rust
fn guard(magic: Magic<T>, check: impl Fn(&T) -> bool, msg: &str) -> Magic<T> {
    magic.parse(|val| {
        if check(&val) {
            Ok(val(
        } else {
            Err(msg.into())
        }
    })
}
```

# Back to practical implementation

> Now that the parser has all the basic building blocks the next step is to reimplement them
> without `Magic<T>` since current version isn't practical.

Author: Hmm... Combinators are practical, representation is not. Something like this maybe?

```suggestion
Now that the parser has all the basic building blocks the next step is to reimplement them
without `Magic<T>` since current internal representation relies on magic to get from arguments on a command line to variables.
```

    inner: P,
    inner_type: PhantomData<T>,
    // transformation function
    mapper: F,
    mapper_result: PhantomData<R>,
}
```

`PhantomData` here is something required by the Rust type system to allow to implement `Parser`
trait for `ParseMap`. Since `ParseMap` doesn't need to know what exact parser it works on as
long as types align - `map` can go directly into the trait as a default implementation.

```rust
trait Parser<T>
where
    Self: Sized,
{
    ...
    fn map<R, F>(self, f: F) -> ParseMap<Self, F, T, R>
    where
        F: Fn(T) -> R,
    {
        ParseMap {
            inner: self,
            inner_type: PhantomData,
            mapper: f,
            mapper_result: PhantomData,
        }
    }
}
```

`run` for `ParseMap` simply runs the inner parser and applies the transformation if inner
parser succeeded.

```rust
impl<F, P, R, T> Parser<T> for ParseMap<P, F, T, R>
where
    P: Parser<R>,
    F: Fn(R) -> T,
{
    fn run(self, args: &mut BTreeMap<&str, &str>) -> Result<T, String> {
        let p = self.inner.run(args)?;
        Ok((self.mapper)(p))
    }
}
```

`parse`'s implementation almost identical to `map` but instead of wrapping the result in `Ok`

> it uses what `mapper` returns.

Author: `parse` is one of the basic operations - failing transformation in a context, it's unrelated to `ParseMap`. I guess I'll define types for that and `zip`/`alt` even though they are mostly boring boilerplate.

```rust
    ...
    fn run(self, args: &mut BTreeMap<&str, &str>) -> Result<T, String> {
        let p = self.inner.run(args)?;
        (self.mapper)(p)
    }
    ...
```

`zip` is close too, but instead of a single inner parser it holds two of them and runs them
sequentially, when either parser fails - whole computation fails by the power of `?` operator:

```rust

>     ...

Author: :+1:

think about how to scale and maintain this:

```rust
fn parse() -> Args {
	let name = None;
	let answer = None;

	let args = std::env::args();
	while let (Some(arg), Some(value)) = (args.next(), args.next()){
		if arg == "--name" {
			name = Some(value.to_string());
		}
		if arg == "--answer" {
			answer = Some(value.parse::<i32>.unwrap()),
		}
	};

	Args {
		name: name.expect("'--name' not given"),
		answer: answer.expect("'--answer' not given"),
	}
}
```

What if you could use functional programming to just describe what you want:

```rust
fn parse() -> Args {
    let name = Arg("--name").parse(|n| n.to_string())
    let answer = Arg("--answer").parse(|a| a.parse::<i32>)
    let Args = name
      .zip(answer)
      .map(|name, answer| Args { name, answer })
      .run()
      .unwrap()
}
```

Now lets see how we get there.

# Parsing command line options

The main goal for this tutorial is to implement a basic library to parse command line options.
If you used `cargo` you are probably familiar with expressions like this:

```console
$ cargo build --bin hello      # build a binary "hello"
$ cargo check --package server # check if package "server" contains any issues

> ```

Reviewer: change the examples above to match, or the other way around?

Parsing command line options in general is a wide problem and to make it more manageable this
tutorial is going to look only at option arguments with a long name: `--bin hello` and
`--package server` parts. This approach however can parse pretty much anything,

> [`bpaf`](https://crates.io/crates/bpaf) is a finished library that uses it.

Reviewer: > arguments with a long name: `--bin`

...

maybe change the description a bit :D

## Humble beginning

> Tutorial starts with some magical handwavey way of taking things from `std::env::args()` and placing
> them into variables and introduces a simple way of taking them out of the variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's start with some magical handwavey way, taking things from `std::env::args()` and placing
them in a container, that introduces a simple way of taking them out again.
```

```rust
// a magical container with a value already inside
struct Magic(&'static str);
impl Magic {
    // a way to get a value out of the container
    fn run(self) -> String {
        self.0.into()
    }
}

#[test]
fn sample() {
    // --name Bob
    let name = Magic("Bob");
    let _result = name.run(); // "Bob"
}
```

> At this point parser can consume multiple string arguments using `Magic` and `Magic::run`.

Reviewer: Yeah, I still don't see how `Magic` connects to "multiple arguments"...

maybe 

```suggestion
At this point the parser can represent single string arguments using `Magic` and extract them via `Magic::run`.
```

## Adding more types

> Next step would be to allow to have arguments of different types. Consider filenames. While

Reviewer: > Consider filenames. While

Still does not relate to either `--bin` or `--package`, nor `--answer` or `--name`...

but i guess you want to start with converting something infallible?

most of the functions would take a regular string reference as a filename - not every `String` is
a valid filename and not every filename is a valid `String`. It's a good practice to keep

> `String` for strings and `PathBuf` for filenames. Type can also serve as a documentation for
> users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`String` for strings and `PathBuf` for filenames. Additionally, proper specialized types also serve as an anchor for documentation.
```

> To be able to consume `PathBuf` from user's input parser needs a way to represent it in the first

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To be able to consume `PathBuf` from user's input, the parser needs a way to represent it in the first
```

> place. One approach would be to make `Magic` a generic datatype:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
place. This can be achieved by making `Magic` a generic datatype:
```

In my mind "One approach would be..." means "There is way A, but we actually do B".

```rust
struct Magic<T>(T);
impl<T> Magic<T> {
    fn run(self) -> T {
        self.0
    }
}
```

> This allows to represent values and get them out but since handwavy magic creates variables of
> type `Magic<&'static str>` parser still needs a way to change the type to `Magic<PathBuf>` or
> any other type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generics allow us to represent and extract values of any type, but since our handwavy magic only creates variables of
type `Magic<&'static str>`, the parser still needs a way to change the type to another such as `Magic<PathBuf>`.
```

For that Category Theory gives an abstraction called
[`Functor`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functor_(functional_programming)?useskin=vector).
A functor allows to change a value inside of a generic context to some other value with the same
or a different type but without changing the context. Sounds scary, but `Option::map` does more
or less the same thing:

```rust
impl<T> Magic<T> {
    fn map<R, F: Fn(T) -> R>(self, f: F) -> Magic<R> {
        Magic(f(self.0))
    }
}

#[test]
fn sample() {
    use std::path::PathBuf;
    // --name Cargo.toml
    let name = Magic("Cargo.toml"); // Magic<&str>
    let _result = name.map(PathBuf::from).run(); // "Cargo.toml", PathBuf
}
```

Every valid `Functor` implementation must satisfy a two laws - preserving identity morphism and
preserving composition of morphisms. For as long as it only changes the values in a context
without affecting the context itself - implementation should be valid.

> At this point parser can represent arguments of any type and provides a way to map between types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point the parser can represent arguments of any type and provides a way to map between types.
```

## Handling failures

> Supporting mapping that can't fail is easy with just the `Functor` abstraction but it can't

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Supporting mapping that can't fail is easy with just the `Functor` abstraction, but it can't
```

handle failures well - consider parsing numeric information:

```
$ app --answer 42
$ app --answer Forty-two
```

A parser using `map`, `FromStr::from_str` and `unwrap` can parse the first line but panics
with a bad error message for the second one. To handle parsing failures `Magic` needs to be
able to represent them. The usual approach for dealing with failing computations in Rust is
with help from the `Result` type.

```rust
struct Magic<T>(Result<T, String>);
impl<T> Magic<T> {
    fn run(self) -> Result<T, String> {
        self.0
    }

    fn parse<R, F: Fn(T) -> Result<R, String>>(self, f: F) -> Magic<R> {
        match self.0 {
            Ok(x) => Magic(f(x)),
            Err(err) => Magic(Err(err)),
        }
    }
```

> Function `parse` applies a failing computation on a value inside `Magic` if one exists or keeps
> the error message untouched otherwise. Change in the representation requires to change `map` and
> `parse` can help with that too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `parse` method applies a failing computation on a value inside `Magic` if one exists or keeps
the error message untouched otherwise. The change in the representation of `Magic` also 
requires to change `map`, but after that, fallible conversions are now possible:
```

```rust
impl<T> Magic<T> {
    fn map<R, F: Fn(T) -> R>(self, f: F) -> Magic<R> {
        self.parse(|x| Ok(f(x)))
    }
}

#[test]
fn sample() {
    use std::str::FromStr;
    // --answer 42
    let answer = Magic(Ok("42"));
    let _result = answer
        .parse(|n| u32::from_str(n).map_err(|e| e.to_string()))
        .run(); // Ok(42)
    todo!("{:?}", _result);

    // --answer Forty-two => Err("invalid digit found in string")
}
```

> At this point the parser can represent arguments of any type and failures too. Function `parse` is an
> ad hoc thing and isn't coming from Category Theory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point the parser can represent arguments of any type and failures too.
Alas, `parse` is an ad-hoc thing and isn't coming from Category Theory.
```

## Composing failing computations

`run` makes it easy to check if computation is successful and to proceed only when it is, but it
also adds a new corner case: consider an app that takes a name and the answer, checks
if the answer is correct and reports to the user:

```rust
let name = match name.run() {
    Ok(ok) => ok,
    _ => panic!("You need to specify name"),
}

// println!("Hello {name}!") // (1)

let answer = match answer.run().expect("You need to specify the answer");

// println!("Hello {name}!") // (2)

if answer == 42 {
    println!("Your answer is correct");
} else {
    println!("Your answer is wrong");
}
```

> Greeting code can go in one of two position: (1) and (2), in the first position it executes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The greeting code can go in one of two position: (1) and (2). In the first position it executes
```

> before all the arguments are validated. In this example failure to validate all the
> arguments results in a confusing messages to user, but it's easy imagine a situation where an
> app might perform some harder to undo actions. Because of this a good argument parser needs to
> have a way to make sure all the arguments are validated before proceeding.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
before all the arguments are validated. In this example a failure to validate the
first argument results in a confusing message to user, but it's easy imagine a situation where, instead of writing a message, an
app might perform some harder to undo actions. Because of this, a good argument parser needs to
have a way to make sure all the arguments are validated before proceeding.
```

An abstraction from the Category Theory called [`Applicative
Functor`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Applicative_functor?useskin=vector) can help with this
scenario.
> Applicative functors allows to run functorial computations in a sequence (unlike
> plain functors), but don't allow to use results from prior computations in the definition of
> subsequent ones.

Sounds scary but `Option::zip` does something similar for `Option` and a variant for `Magic` looks
like this:

```rust
impl<T> Magic<T> {
    fn zip<R>(self, other: Magic<R>) -> Magic<(T, R)> {
        match (self.0, other.0) {
            (Ok(t), Ok(r)) => Magic(Ok((t, r))),
            (_, Err(err)) | (Err(err), _) => Magic(Err(err)),
        }
    }
}
```

> This helps to combine two independent computations for *name* and *answer* into a single

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This helps to combine the two independent computations for *name* and *answer* into a single
```

## Composing failing computations in a different way

In some cases there can be more than one way to represent some information and for as long as
one of the representations is valid the alternatives may fail. To give an example an app might
expect user to specify either their nick name or a full name:

```console
app --nick Bob
app --fullname "Bob the Magnificent"
```

and work with whatever version the user prefers. For this style of composition Category Theory offers an
abstraction called
[`Alternative Functor`](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Haskell/Alternative_and_MonadPlus).

It extends the parser with a single function that takes two values in contexts and picks one
that succeeds:

```rust
impl<T> Magic<T> {
    /// if first computation fails - pick the second one
    fn alt(self, other: Self) -> Self {
        match self.0 {
            Ok(t) => Magic(Ok(t)), => T
            Err(_) => other,
        }
    }
}
```
And a program that takes either full or short name might look like this:
```rust
let short = Magic(Err("No short name given").to_string());
let long = Magic(Ok("Bob the Magnificent"));
let name = short.alt(long);

println!("Hello {}", name.run().unwrap());
```

> Since `zip` isn't constrained by argument types for as long as they the same - it can pick

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since `zip` isn't constrained by argument types for as long as they are the same - it can pick
```

    }

    /// apply a failing transformation to a contained value
    fn parse<R, F: Fn(T) -> Result<R, String>>(self, f: F) -> Magic<R> {
        match self.0 {
            Ok(x) => Magic(f(x)),
            Err(err) => Magic(Err(err)),
        }
    }

    /// compose two computations into a single one requiring both to succeed
    fn zip<R>(self, other: Magic<R>) -> Magic<(T, R)> {
        match (self.0, other.0) {
            (Ok(t), Ok(r)) => Magic(Ok((t, r))),
            (Err(err), _) | (_, Err(err)) => Magic(Err(err)),
        }
    }

    /// compose two computations, picking succeeding one
    fn alt(self, other: Self) -> Self {
        match self.0 {
            Ok(t) => Magic(Ok(t)),
            Err(_) => other,
        }
    }

    /// create an unconditionally succeeding computation
    fn pure(val: T) -> Self {
        Magic(Ok(val))
    }

    /// create an unconditionally failing computation
    fn fail(msg: &str) -> Self {
        Magic(Err(msg.to_owned()))
    }
}
```

Those seven operations serve as a base for the parser. They allow to compose primitive argument
parsers in many ways to create a very wide range of computations and there's no mutations in the

> API itself so it fits perfectly with a functional programming style.

Reviewer: > API itself so it fits perfectly with a functional programming style.

Did you mention this feature of functional pgming above?

There's a few examples of useful operations implemented in terms of this base API

Optional command line arguments:

```rust
fn optional(magic: Magic<T>) -> Magic<Option<T>> {
    // if magic contains a value - wrap it in Some, otherwise use None
    // this will also consume any errors that can be inside, but we'll address
    // this problem later
    magic.map(Some).alt(pure(None))
}
```

Validating values with a function:

```rust
fn guard(magic: Magic<T>, check: impl Fn(&T) -> bool, msg: &str) -> Magic<T> {
    magic.parse(|val| {
        if check(&val) {
            Ok(val(
        } else {
            Err(msg.into())
        }
    })
}
```

# Back to practical implementation

Now that the parser has all the basic building blocks the next step is to reimplement them

> without `Magic<T>` since current internal representation relies on magic to get from arguments

Reviewer: ```suggestion
without `Magic<T>`, since current internal representation relies on handwavy magic to provide `Magic` containers for arguments
```

> on a command line to variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on a command line.
```

An obvious way to represent a specific flag would be by keeping its name around:

```rust
struct Arg(&'static str);
```

> One way to represent all name-argument-pairs is to store them in a `BTreeMap<String,

Reviewer: same One way point as above ;)

applicative functors lets library users perform almost arbitrary transformations and
validations. For example, it's possible to have a single option to write to a multiple fields
or require that fields come in groups.

The fact that individual parsers compose makes it easy to share them across multiple binaries
in the same project. For example if your apps contain a notion of data input from multiple
types of sources (local file, remote data base, live network feed) it might be convenient to
have a single datatype representing it, possibly with `enum`, and a single shared parser that
lets users specify it. Such parser can contain all the help messages, validations, possible
dynamic shell completion functions and so on and can be easily reused across different binaries.

Typical steps consists of

- figuring out a list of options your app might take and relationships between them
- packing those options into a composition of `struct`s and `enum`s (to represent mutually required and mutually exclusive combinations respectively)
- decorating parsers with help messages, validations and shell completion functions

> The derive macro supplied by` bpaf`'s `derive` feature helps to avoid writing most of the parsing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The derive macro supplied by `bpaf`'s `derive` feature helps to avoid writing most of the parsing
```

# Programming is hard, looking for better abstractions

> If you ever wrote a program bigger than a few lines of code you probably know that the bigger
> the program gets - the harder it's to make sure it does exactly what you meant due to how
> different parts can interact. Over time programmers and computer scientists discovered multiple
> ways to manage this complexity. Programming went from physically wiring the instructions to
> writing them as mnemonics with assembly language, to abstractions with variables, labels,
> functions, and so on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you ever wrote a program bigger than a few lines of code you probably know that the bigger
the program gets - the harder it gets to ensure it does exactly what you meant, due to how
different parts can interact. Over time, programmers and computer scientists discovered various
ways to manage this complexity. Programming went from physically wiring the instructions, to
writing them as mnemonics with assembly languages, to abstractions with variables, labels,
functions, and so on.
```

> [Functional Programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_programming)
> is one of the paradigms for managing complexity with its main idea of writing code as a set of
> functions and using those functions to pass values around instead imperative style of steps
> to perform to mutate some data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Functional Programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_programming)
is one of the paradigms for managing complexity. Its main idea is to abstract code as a set of
functions, and using those functions to pass values around rather than imperatively
to mutate data.
```

> Main goal of this tutorial is to explain the idea of Applicative Functors, why you may want to
> use them, what each method does. Code shown here is going to be similar but slightly different
> from what you would use in a full featured command line argument parsing library - for
> production you would want better error messages, help generation, dynamic completion and so
> on. But the main operations stay the same. Applicative Functors are not limited to arg parsing
> and you can try to follow this tutorial to get some ideas for your own problems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main goal of this tutorial is to explain the idea of Applicative Functors, what its methods do,
and why you may want to use them. The code shown here is going to be similar but slightly different
from what you would use in a full featured command line argument parsing library - for
production you would want better error messages, help generation, dynamic completion and so
on. The main operations however, stay the same. Applicative Functors are not even limited to arg parsing
and you can try to follow this tutorial to get some ideas for your own problems.
```

Imagine you want to create an argument parser that parses your arguments into a struct like this:

```rust
struct Args {
    bin: String,
    jobs: u32,
}
```

If you want to write an argument parser purely imperatively, look at the horrors that entails,
think about how to scale and maintain this:

> ```rust
> fn parse() -> Args {
> 	let bin = None;
> 	let jobs = None;
> 
> 	let args = std::env::args();
> 	while let (Some(arg), Some(value)) = (args.next(), args.next()){
> 		if arg == "--bin" {
> 			bin = Some(value.to_string());
> 		}
> 		if arg == "--jobs" {
> 			jobs = Some(value.parse::<u32>.unwrap()),
> 		}
> 	};
> 
> 	Args {
> 		name: name.expect("'--bin' not given"),
> 		answer: answer.expect("'--jobs' not given"),
> 	}
> }
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```rust
fn parse() -> Args {
    let bin = None;
    let jobs = None;

    let args = std::env::args();
    while let (Some(arg), Some(value)) = (args.next(), args.next()){
        if arg == "--bin" {
            bin = Some(value.to_string());
        }
        if arg == "--jobs" {
            jobs = Some(value.parse::<u32>.unwrap()),
        }
    };

    Args {
        name: name.expect("'--bin' not given"),
        answer: answer.expect("'--jobs' not given"),
    }
}
```
````

What if you could use functional programming to just describe what you want:

```rust
fn parse() -> Args {
    let name = Arg("--bin").parse(|n| n.to_string());
    let answer = Arg("--jobs").parse(|a| a.parse::<u32>);
    let Args = name
      .zip(answer)
      .map(|(name, answer)| Args { bin, jobs })
      .run()
      .unwrap()
}
```

Now lets see how we get there.

# Parsing command line options

> The main goal for this tutorial is to implement a basic library to parse command line options.

Reviewer: > The main goal for this tutorial is to

Thats not the main goal, the main goal was to "Main goal of this tutorial is to explain the idea of Applicative Functors"...

Author: Actually we can drop this line from here now that the goal is explained above... 
```suggestion
```

```

## Humble beginning

Let's start with some magical handwavey way, taking things from `std::env::args()` and placing
them in a container, that introduces a simple way of taking them out again.

```rust
// a magical container with a value already inside
struct Magic(&'static str);
impl Magic {
    // a way to get a value out of the container
    fn run(self) -> String {
        self.0.into()
    }
}

#[test]
fn sample() {
    // --bin hello
    let bin = Magic("hello");
    let result = name.run();
    assert_eq!(result, "hello");
}
```

At this point the parser can represent single string arguments using `Magic` and extract them via `Magic::run`.

## Adding more types

Next step would be to allow to have arguments of different types. Consider filenames. While
most of the functions would take a regular string reference as a filename - not every `String` is
a valid filename and not every filename is a valid `String`. It's a good practice to keep
`String` for strings and `PathBuf` for filenames. Additionally, proper specialized types also serve as an anchor for documentation.

To be able to consume `PathBuf` from user's input, the parser needs a way to represent it in the first

> place. This can be achieved by making `Magic` a generic datatype:

Reviewer: consider numbers? --> jobs?

Author: I'm talking about numbers lower and I think I'm using `--jobs` as an example

Author: Is there something specific I'm still missing?

Reviewer: > I'm talking about numbers lower and I think I'm using --jobs as an example

yes, you show this with numbers but you introduce it with pathbufs (and then dont use the paths).

Why not explain it with numbers (as you will expand on later with error handling) annd mention that also allows other maybe more complex types

Author: > Next step would be to allow to have arguments of different types. Consider `--jobs` argument.
For some applications passing "4" to the consumer is valid, but in most cases consumer would
prefer to use its numeric value. To be able to pass a number like `4u32` the parser needs a way
to represent it in the first place. This can be achieved by making `Magic` a generic datatype:

I guess... Let's see how it looks.

functor transformed with a composition of those two functions). For as long as it only changes
the values in a context without affecting the context itself - implementation should be valid.

At this point the parser can represent arguments of any type and provides a way to map between types.

## Handling failures

Supporting mapping that can't fail is easy with just the `Functor` abstraction, but it can't
handle failures well - consider parsing numeric information:

```
$ app --jobs 42
$ app --jobs Forty-two
```

A parser using `map`, `FromStr::from_str` and `unwrap` can parse the first line but panics
with a bad error message for the second one. To handle parsing failures `Magic` needs to be
able to represent them. The usual approach for dealing with failing computations in Rust is
with help from the `Result` type.

```rust
struct Magic<T>(Result<T, String>);
impl<T> Magic<T> {
    fn run(self) -> Result<T, String> {
        self.0
    }

    fn parse<R, F: Fn(T) -> Result<R, String>>(self, f: F) -> Magic<R> {
        match self.0 {
            Ok(x) => Magic(f(x)),
            Err(err) => Magic(Err(err)),
        }

>     }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    }
}
```

```

The `parse` method applies a failing computation on a value inside `Magic` if one exists or keeps
the error message untouched otherwise. The change in the representation of `Magic` also
requires to change `map`, but after that, fallible conversions are now possible:

```rust
impl<T> Magic<T> {
    fn map<R, F: Fn(T) -> R>(self, f: F) -> Magic<R> {
        self.parse(|x| Ok(f(x)))
    }
}

#[test]
fn sample() {
    use std::str::FromStr;
    // --jobs 42
    let jobs = Magic(Ok("42"));
    let result = answer
        .parse(|n| u32::from_str(n).map_err(|e| e.to_string()))
        .run();
    assert_eq!(result, Ok(42));

    let jobs = Magic(Ok("Forty-two"));
    let result = answer
        .parse(|n| u32::from_str(n).map_err(|e| e.to_string()))
        .run();
    assert_eq!(result, Err("invalid digit found in string".to_owned()))
}
```

At this point the parser can represent arguments of any type and failures too.

> Alas, `parse` is an ad-hoc thing and isn't coming from Category Theory.

Reviewer 2: I guess `Alas` is a typo?

Author: It's an archaic/humorous expression of grief, pity, or concern.

Reviewer 2: Good to know, thanks. 😄

## Composing failing computations

`run` makes it easy to check if computation is successful and to proceed only when it is, but
it also adds a new corner case: consider an app that takes a name and the answer, checks if the
answer is correct and reports to the user:

```rust
let bin = match bin.run().expect("You need to specify --bin");

// println!("Building binary {bin}!") // (1)

let jobs = match jobs.run().expect("You need to specify --jobs");

> // println!("Building binary {bin}!") // (1)

Reviewer 2: This line should be (2)?

Author: Right, that was me doing copy-paste when renaming things.

```suggestion
// println!("Building binary {bin}!") // (2)
```

    fn parse<R, F: Fn(T) -> Result<R, String>>(self, f: F) -> Magic<R> {
        match self.0 {
            Ok(x) => Magic(f(x)),
            Err(err) => Magic(Err(err)),
        }
    }

    /// compose two computations into a single one requiring both to succeed
    fn zip<R>(self, other: Magic<R>) -> Magic<(T, R)> {
        match (self.0, other.0) {
            (Ok(t), Ok(r)) => Magic(Ok((t, r))),
            (Err(err), _) | (_, Err(err)) => Magic(Err(err)),
        }
    }

    /// compose two computations, picking succeeding one
    fn alt(self, other: Self) -> Self {
        match self.0 {
            Ok(t) => Magic(Ok(t)),
            Err(_) => other,
        }
    }

    /// create an unconditionally succeeding computation
    fn pure(val: T) -> Self {
        Magic(Ok(val))
    }

    /// create an unconditionally failing computation
    fn fail(msg: &str) -> Self {
        Magic(Err(msg.to_owned()))
    }
}
```

Those seven operations serve as a base for the parser. They allow to compose primitive argument
parsers in many ways to create a very wide range of computations and there's no mutations in the
API itself so it fits perfectly with a functional programming style.

> There's a few examples of useful operations implemented in terms of this base API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a few examples of useful operations implemented in terms of this base API.
```

Optional command line arguments:

```rust
fn optional(magic: Magic<T>) -> Magic<Option<T>> {
    // if magic contains a value - wrap it in Some, otherwise use None
    // this will also consume any errors that can be inside, but we'll address
    // this problem later
    magic.map(Some).alt(pure(None))
}
```

Validating values with a function:

```rust
fn guard(magic: Magic<T>, check: impl Fn(&T) -> bool, msg: &str) -> Magic<T> {
    magic.parse(|val| {
        if check(&val) {
            Ok(val(
        } else {
            Err(msg.into())
        }
    })
}
```

> # Back to practical implementation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Back to the practical implementation
```

have a single datatype representing it, possibly with `enum`, and a single shared parser that
lets users specify it. Such parser can contain all the help messages, validations, possible
dynamic shell completion functions and so on and can be easily reused across different binaries.

Typical steps consists of

- figuring out a list of options your app might take and relationships between them
- packing those options into a composition of `struct`s and `enum`s (to represent mutually required and mutually exclusive combinations respectively)
- decorating parsers with help messages, validations and shell completion functions

The derive macro supplied by` bpaf`'s `derive` feature helps to avoid writing most of the parsing
and composition code by hand, but in some cases using a mix of derived and manually written code
leads to overall cleaner results.

## Using Category Theory abstractions such as Applicative Functors

Rust already supports a very limited subset of similar function compositions with unstable
`Try` trait and `?` operator. Abstractions introduced in this tutorial can help to extend such

> composition with ability to implicitly pass information around, to try different paths through

Reviewer: ```suggestion
composition with the ability to implicitly pass information around, to try different paths through
```

compositions and collect information about successes and failures and make this information
available though side channels.

> As shown earlier Applicative Functors can help with splitting problems containing both business

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As shown earlier, Applicative Functors can help with splitting problems containing both business
```

logic (what command line options to consume and what constraints they must obey) and glue logic
(what arguments got consumed so far, how to pass consumed arguments around, how to make sure
consistent validations, etc) into performant and purely functional style code as far as the
external API is concerned.

While designing an Applicative style API requires some specialized knowledge - mostly what kind

> of laws implementation needs to obey and how to check them, using the resulting API does not. With

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of laws implementation needs to obey and how to check them - using the resulting API does not. With
```
